.TH KNETD 8 "2026-06-25" "knetd" "System Manager's Manual"
.SH NAME
knetd \- Kronosnet VPN daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B knetd
[\fB\-\-config\fR \fIFILE\fR]
[\fB\-\-node\-id\fR \fIID\fR]
[\fB\-\-help\fR]
[\fB\-\-version\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B knetd
is a daemon that manages libknet VPN instances for high-availability clustering
and multi-link fault-tolerant networking. It provides JSON-RPC control over
Unix domain sockets and supports automatic configuration from TOML files.

The daemon can manage multiple VPN instances simultaneously, each with multiple
remote hosts and redundant network links. It integrates with libnozzle for
tap device management and supports encryption (via OpenSSL/NSS/gcrypt) and
compression (via zlib/lz4/zstd/etc).

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-config " " \fIFILE\fR
Path to configuration file (TOML format). Default search order:
.RS
.IP 1. 4
Path from \fB\-\-config\fR
.IP 2.
Path from \fBKNETD_CONFIG\fR environment variable
.IP 3.
/etc/knetd/knetd.conf
.IP 4.
./knetd.toml
.RE

.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-node\-id " " \fIID\fR
Local node ID (1-65535) for node-agnostic configuration. Can also be set via
\fBKNETD_NODE_ID\fR environment variable. Required when configuration defines
multiple nodes.

.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print help information and exit.

.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print version information and exit.

.SH CONFIGURATION
The daemon uses TOML configuration files. See
.BR knetd.conf (5)
for complete documentation.

.SS Minimal Configuration
.EX
socket_path = "/run/knetd/knetd.sock"
log_level = "info"

[[instances]]
name = "cluster-net"
auto_start = true
.EE

.SS Node-Agnostic Configuration
The same configuration file can be deployed to all nodes in a cluster.
Each node identifies itself via \fB\-\-node\-id\fR:

.EX
[[instances]]
name = "ha-cluster"
full_mesh = true

[[instances.nodes]]
host_id = 1
name = "node1"
link_addresses = ["192.168.1.1:5405"]

[[instances.nodes]]
host_id = 2
name = "node2"
link_addresses = ["192.168.1.2:5405"]
.EE

Start on each node:
.EX
# Node 1
knetd --node-id 1

# Node 2
knetd --node-id 2
.EE

.SH SIGNALS
.TP
.B SIGINT, SIGTERM
Graceful shutdown. Saves state (if configured) and cleans up all VPN instances.

.TP
.B SIGHUP
Reload configuration (not yet implemented).

.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/knetd/knetd.conf
Default configuration file

.TP
.I /run/knetd/knetd.sock
Default Unix domain socket for RPC

.TP
.I /var/lib/knetd/state.json
Persistent state (if state_file configured)

.TP
.I /var/log/knetd/
Log directory (if file logging enabled)

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B KNETD_CONFIG
Path to configuration file (overrides default search)

.TP
.B KNETD_NODE_ID
Local node ID for node-agnostic configuration

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success

.TP
.B 1
Configuration error or runtime failure

.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Single Node
.EX
# Start with default config
knetd

# Start with custom config
knetd --config /etc/cluster/vpn.toml
.EE

.SS Multi-Node Cluster
.EX
# Deploy same config to all nodes, start each with unique ID
# On node 1:
knetd --node-id 1 --config /etc/knetd/cluster.conf

# On node 2:
knetd --node-id 2 --config /etc/knetd/cluster.conf

# On node 3:
knetd --node-id 3 --config /etc/knetd/cluster.conf
.EE

.SS With Systemd
.EX
# Standard service
systemctl start knetd

# Per-node instance
echo "NODE_ID=1" > /etc/knetd/cluster.env
systemctl start knetd@cluster
.EE

.SH SECURITY
The daemon requires elevated privileges for certain operations:
.IP \(bu 2
Creating nozzle (tap) devices requires \fBCAP_NET_ADMIN\fR or root
.IP \(bu
Binding to privileged ports requires \fBCAP_NET_BIND_SERVICE\fR
.IP \(bu
Setting socket buffer sizes may require \fBCAP_SYS_ADMIN\fR

When run via systemd, the service is hardened with:
.IP \(bu 2
Minimal capabilities (NET_ADMIN, NET_RAW, SYS_ADMIN)
.IP \(bu
Read-only root filesystem
.IP \(bu
Restricted namespaces and address families
.IP \(bu
Private /tmp

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR knetctl (1),
.BR knetd.conf (5),
.BR systemd.service (5)

.PP
Full documentation: /usr/share/doc/knetd/

.PP
Project homepage: https://github.com/kronosnet/kronosnet

.SH AUTHORS
Written as part of the Kronosnet project.

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2024-2026 Kronosnet contributors.
.br
License: LGPL-2.1+

.SH BUGS
Report bugs to: https://github.com/kronosnet/kronosnet/issues
